Add Flags Tips to abseil.io (#276)
abseil/abseil.github.io: _posts/2019-05-10-totw-90.md

---
title: "Tip of the Week #90: Retired Flags"
layout: tips
sidenav: side-nav-tips.html
published: true
permalink: tips/90
type: markdown
order: "090"
---

Originally posted as TotW #90 on March 19, 2015

*by [Titus Winters](mailto:titus@google.com)

One of the frustrating things about our (mis)use of command-line flags in

> google3 is the difficulty in removing a flag from binary and production

Reviewer: Drop ref to google3

servers safely (revisit https://abseil.io/tips/45 for some frustrating
misuses). The trouble? A binary won’t start if you specify a flag that is
no longer defined, and thus removal of flags may require coordination

> between C++ code and your running binaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
between C++ code and your job launching scripts and configurations.
```

In some cases, this coordination can be quite challenging (conditioning
production code based on a binary version). If only there were a better way!

There is. A while back we added a new concept to the C++ command-line flags
system called "retired flags" ([`ABSL_RETIRED_FLAG`][1]).

A retired flag creates no symbol in C++ (no more `FLAGS_some_flag` global
variable to rely upon), does not appear in `--help`, but will be accepted when
specified on the command line (although an `ERROR` will be logged). In this way,
flags that are no longer used by the code can be "retired", separating C++

> changes from production code changes. Once the configuration changes are all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changes from production configuration changes. Once the configuration changes are all
```

clear, the retired flag can be removed once and for all.

Retired flags were designed to be used in many situations (including cases

> involving components or other non-atomic commit requirements). A step-by-step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
involving cross-repo non-atomic commit requirements). A step-by-step
```

for a very simple flag retirement could look like this:

1.  Remove uses of `FLAGS_frobber` from code.

    If you’re following the advice of https://abseil.io/tips/45 and using
    flags primarily from `main()` this should be easy to do and to check
    for.

2.  Change the definition of the flag to retire it. That is:

    ```c++
    ABSL_FLAG(type, frobber, "default", "Which frobber to use?");
    ```

    should become:

    ```c++
    ABSL_RETIRED_FLAG(type, frobber, "default", "retired");
    ```

3.  Wait for binary release(s). Once all the jobs in all of your serving cells
    are invoking the new binary, you can continue.

> 4.  Remove the flag from your production code. Once searching the relevant production

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4.  Remove the flag from your production configs. Once searching the relevant production
```

>     code shows no hits for the frobber flag, you can continue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    configurations shows no hits for the frobber flag, you can continue.
```

5.  Remove the retired flag.

We’ve had success with very complicated flag removals: the motivating example

> for this effort was the removal of flags defined in s legacy filesystem, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for this effort was the removal of flags defined in a legacy internal filesystem API, which
```
